We're talking to Dr. Otto Bettmann, and you were going to show me some things that you said.
Oh yeah, these are, you know, I do not have, I do not have any, any items really, very shoe things, but I have, I have quite a considerable collection of, of
slides which I can get back from Batman in 8x10 crosses.
These are magnificent.
I wish we'd have had these for our book.
Well, I mean, it's not the overwhelming, but this enormous power of the book that in the Middle Ages
People studied it by reading books, but there was only one book available, and the professor had it, and from the pulpit he read out of Hippocrates.
And if the students here at the medical school anatomized or dissected the body, and they found...
difference between the natural setup of the human body and compared with what Hippocrates or Galen or one of the great doctors said people always at that time were such great lovers and admirals of books that they
that they always gave the bookish knowledge, the precedent over what they found in nature, the enormous power of the book.
But anyway, these are just early printing presses and how the enormous power of the book
overruled, uh, overruled, uh, reality.
Where did you, now, where did you find these illustrations?
Are these things that you gathered on your own, or?
Well, in print shops, in, in print shops, in a library, uh, there are book rooms.
I traveled around at my little library.
At that time,
conditions were very liberal.
People welcomed you.
You found something, and you got started with your little library, a Leica stand.
You just photographed these things, and then I arranged them not by artist, as was a rule, but by subject.
These are pictures that you shot yourself with your Leica?
Yeah, at the beginning.
This, for instance, is an interesting picture.
I forgot now which scene it is.
In a way, too bad I had to loan a friend my protector that could have shown it to you in quick succession.
This was a first pencil, for instance.
I was very, I applied to all these pictures more a commercial aspect that I, that I, the art of reading, for instance, this famous picture where a man invented a reading wheel that he could read many, many pictures at one time.
And that has a certain prophetic aspect
prophetic impact for us or we have come to read to read in a circular manner in a CD today.
Yes, absolutely.
Are these pictures that you took in Leipzig?
No, I travel.
It might be in Luxembourg or Holland or
But my idea was simply that art is not only a representation or reflection of the artist's own feelings or beliefs, but that these things also give us a history of how men lived.
The cultural aspect is often very, very interesting, too.
It isn't only that...
Rembrandt painted a mother with a baby.
It's not only a Rembrandt-ish idea, but it gives us an idea how people lived, how they made a living, and how they read this wonderful tour of the pictures of St.
Joan.
alone in the cell.
That doesn't quite reflect the beauty of all these pictures, but this thing I had a sort of filing system.
This picture did not only appear under the name of the artist, but it was a subject-wise cross-index that showed
angels or guarding angels.
This man uses the forerunner of the modern pencil, the silver point.
And you could affect an impact on a piece of parchment.
Only paper was not in general use.
And so the pictures were very small.
These silver point early drawings of the 15th century, the great works of art.
And here the devil is compelled to have the idea of how books were read.
And here the devil is compelled to hold the Bible in front of
But this isn't terribly interesting for you.
You mentioned the phrase when you started, the power of the book.
That's a phrase that you used, the power of the book.
Yes, it is.
Today, it's the TV.
The book is really a little bit offensive, I must say.
Young people don't see the book as...
a sense of medium of communication, and we feel ourselves to the way a little pedantically.
Are you fearful about the future of the book?
Are you fearful?
Not, not.
Why don't you sit down, darling?
No, you, please, make yourself.
But I'd like to offer you an opportunity or something.
Maybe go out for lunch.
Okay, whatever, but we'd like to...
I just want you to be comfortable, and we'll conduct the interview.
Yes, I think the book is maybe not in decline, but on the defense of the young people, I think they can sit there passively in front of the television set, and being full-fed, what they want you to know, reading,
does involve and does compel participation with the author.
And this is more and more being pushed into the background.
It is rather pitiful often when one talks to young people, how little they know.
But I may be a cultural vulture.
Maybe too much oriented after the book.
I come from a very bookish background.
My father was a doctor and a great bibliographer.
And Leipzig, where I was born, it's all in this book there.
There was a great book down town.
printers lived there and also of course Bach and so we were educated very early in the necessity to read and in the beauty of books and to bed and I don't have my projector here I could have shown this in a minute
I love the conversation, actually.
I prefer that.
It's a pretty steep German accent.
You received your Ph.D.
in 1927, I believe, which is almost 70 years ago, and then you were a curator of rare books.
So you must have thought at that time that your life would be in books.
Yes, it was a matter of course.
I would be a bookman.
My other preference, I would have liked to become a doctor like my father.
But in this book I gave you, I think you hear the whole history of...
We'll find that, Doctor.
You don't have to look that up.
I'm just going to look at the Campbell Bank.
This was the book.
my father was a collector of a man by the name of other names in the 17th century 17th century monk Jesuit priest who was strangely interested in mechanics and he invented things like
like the first Latana Magica, not too far away from our modern gadget.
He was very much interested in sound transmission.
My father had this book.
I wasn't able to bring it here.
If I brought it here, I had to sell it.
I assume, but a reprint of this is available.
It shows... Oh, okay, I see it, yes.
This was written in Latin, of course.
And whenever there was a new Kirscher book, when my father came into my father's Bailey Wick,
The children were called down into his office, and he admired... Your father called you to admire the books that he... Your father called the children in to admire the books that he obtained?
Yeah.
He did.
The most interesting man.
Anyway, so we were bound to...
Maybe there are redeeming factors today.
People know more, but what they know is less deep and less absorbed by the mind.
It all becomes visual.
So I made a living of sorts through the visual.
I must admit I'm a great believer in reading and really coming face to face with the past and the wisdom of the past.
It can't, that pictures cannot give you.
Really?
So I bite a hand to it, it fed me.
But you have, but you amassed perhaps three million images.
I think you gathered about three million images in your... Yes, I did.
I was simply picture mad.
I don't know who, why, but...
I thought it was missing.
We have great picture repositories that show us the outer life, but the inner life that only books can convey to us and urge us on to think about the world and improve our own status in it.
So it's very paradoxical.
really uh my father was in a group of uh of biblio fields uh yeah
in access to this club.
Ninety-nine.
Yeah.
What was the name of the group?
The Leipzig Bitlufar.
Ah.
The Leipziger Bitlufield Art.
And these are there?
These are some of their offerings that I still have.
Beautifully printed.
The Leipziger Bitlufield and everybody
Batman was in here, Johannes Batman.
This is your father?
Yeah.
Anyway, so we were educated in the book.
May I look at it, Doctor?
No, but it all means there's nothing.
Why don't you call me Otto, for sure?
Yes, sir.
Well, I would be honored to call you also, but I feel that you dropped your best one, honestly.
No, you have just my... So you expected to spend your career as a bookman, of course.
Yes, well, that's... Then one came Hitler and the chain bill.
Yeah, it's true.
And then this, my coming to America was...
simply a miracle, as if God had held out a hand and took me out of this terrible, hopeless situation.
I would have been the first one to be picked up for the concentration camp, but luckily we had very good friends and relatives, bad months.
in Cincinnati and St.
Louis, and they brought me to London to be disgusted.
We always looked at Hitler as a joke.
We said it could not last.
It was simply ridiculous.
And, of course, all of a sudden he was chancellor, and he issued a UCAS,
all the Jews in state positions would have to leave immediately and so I left this job as assistant curator in the Berlin Art Library but I still had already collected via photographs some subject pictures so medicine the history of medicine or the history of
of books itself, the history of reading.
And I was lucky enough then to establish a business that could use these.
You had medical situations and people who were through sleeping pills, all of a sudden
I felt it might be nice to make a history of sleeping pills.
In former sleeping media, there's, for instance, a very interesting picture of an aristocrat who couldn't sleep, and he called in a Fittler to...
to simply play soft melodies, to simply fiddle him to sleep, or other funny situations.
Anyway, the commercial avenue was still open, so I said if they don't want me as a librarian, scholar,
try maybe to do that and sell pictures for industrial use, advertising illustrations.
Did you try to get a position as a scholar and an academic here for it?
No, not really.
I did it on my own.
I simply wrote to Bayer Asperen and said, why don't you use this picture, this ancient medical picture for
for a sleeping pill or something.
That was already quite common in Germany, and you still could do business as a Jew, but then everybody had to become a member of the ICE commerce unit.
You received a number, and if you don't have this number, you couldn't do business.
So
My relatives in Cincinnati, Alfred Bettmann and others, thought I was foolish to stay in Germany.
But I was a totally, totally sold and Germanic Kultur with a capital T. It was simply awful.
And you couldn't do that either, and I simply had to emigrate.
And here I found the most ready acceptance, and it was happy, happy, and quite fulfilled, and even starting to make a living, setting up an archive and contacting various people where they produce it for
commercial use, textbook people.
One of the first people that visited me in a small little back home with a friend bookseller had given me a slap there and photographed my
material and so the publishers too became interested and one of the first one who visited me was Mr. Lincoln Schuster I guess you are a little bit too young to remember him he was a great figure Simon and Schuster you know and he came and he himself was so
So very interested in pictures.
Another picture historian.
Yeah.
And he calls you another picture historian.
Because you and your letterhead describe yourself as a graphic historian.
Yeah.
Which I think is so fascinating, and it is so quintessential, quintessentially 20th century.
Yeah, very, very, very interesting.
What I'm interested in is,
perception that you had to realize when you got your first Leica camera.
Well, I was really pushed into it.
I can't take great credit for it.
My father was a great hontanologist and he had a little dark room in his clinic and I simply got started.
And when we had
visit us for the birthday of the children.
My father became his successor in the clinic, but he didn't last.
He had to leave very soon, too.
Anyway, he called the children down and showed us x-rays and pictures and asked us to
I read in the New York Times that you came here with two trunks, two steam trunks of photographic images, and five dollars in chains or something like that.
What were the photographs that you brought?
What essentially were they, the pictures?
Well, they were mostly Germanic things.
I mean, hunting, royalty, or maybe also much on bookmaking.
I was simply on account of this book interest that was early woven.
Leipzig was a great center for that.
It had the role that you probably have heard of, the Frankfurt Book Fair.
Oh, the most famous.
It was really located in Leipzig.
But the Russians actually destroyed that somewhat.
I mean, when the Russians came in, it was really barbaric.
nobody wanted to come to Leipzig anymore.
And so, uh, uh, Frankfurt stool, it's thunder.
Did you have a sense that when, I mean, the things you chose to take to the United States with you was photographs?
Yeah.
Well, I was a little afraid that they wouldn't let this out.
I looked at them as other precious, uh, possessions, but, uh, they, uh,
people rather thought me crazy and I explained them they said well that's all good and well you go into America but how do you want to make a living after all these historical things they're fine for us culture Germans the Germans were always so proud but they didn't really prove it with their concentration camps so anyway
They were afraid that I couldn't make a living with picture research and offering industry and the publisher's pictorial histories.
They said that America is oriented towards the future, not the past.
The past plays absolutely no role in America.
it's such a mistaken idea for I found the interest really in historical things quite remarkable and one must consider that America has a relatively short history packed thousands of years of German empire into 200 years since our history is so short we really are very anxious to
to study it and get directions from it.
So I found that Robert, business Robert, picked up quickly.
And one friend here in New York whom I explained my idea, how do you want to make a living here?
He said, throw all this stuff into the huts.
America in general had this enormous reputation for being present-minded.
Of course, it's quite true, but I found a great sense of the historic, really.
Of course, what you perceived is the importance of the graphic side.
Yes, to show the picture.
That was not my merit.
I lost some sort of a hunch that
we did approach the picture age and that the birds really became somewhat undecrated everything in pictures the founding of Life magazine simply turned everything into the pictorial and even the newspapers today
I think even the Times would like much more of a pictorial imaging.
I think they even built now a big plant to handle color pictures.
It's we see that.
I do a weekly newspaper column that I sell to newspapers.
Yeah, you told me that.
And what they're interested in most is not just the story, but what they call the art.
Oh, really?
The photograph.
So we furnish the pictures to go with.
Are these book criticisms, or what is it?
Well, what I do is an interview like we're doing now with an individual who has written a book.
and I, of course, read the books.
But then I will either take some photographs, or photographs will be furnished to us, and then we distribute copies of these to the newspaper clients.
Not unlike what you did, but that's part of the package that we sell.
Syndicate.
Exactly, exactly.
And what is happening now is that film is going to disappear.
It's all going to be on microchips.
You're going to be taking pictures with a camera and...
The computer thing, it's really undecrated.
Today, if you want a picture of a man beating his wife, you simply type it out on the computer, don't you?
That's right.
Well, all the photographs that Mr. Gates bought from the Redman Archive, they're all being digitized.
They're all going to be put into computers.
So you don't need the admission of the photographs and paper and all that.
What's going to happen is you can call up on your computer, at your home computer,
And you'll call, and you'll ask for a picture, and they'll show you the Winston Churchill picture that you have, or the Marilyn Monroe and Joe DiMaggio picture.
I wonder how they get reproducible copies.
It's amazing, but it's right over the computer.
It's digitized.
But how do you, because Gates knows he wants to get paid for it.
That's what they're figuring out.
You have an account with them, and in order to copy it, you pay a fee.
Yeah.
And I guess that's how it works, right?
I have no idea.
I have no idea how it works, but they're going to work on it.
And that's what is really fascinating, isn't it, how your focus on the graphic history of the 20th century is now going to get an entirely new life in the 21st century and beyond.
Yeah, that's right.
And that is fascinating from my standpoint, as you can see.
I mean, the intermediate steps are eliminated.
No more paper, no more documents.
People ask us for, excuse me, a whorehouse.
You seem a dirty, dirty friend of mine.
In New York City, you simply, in the olden days, you would get 10 pictures around Photofire, put it in an envelope,
and send it out and then hope that one picture will be accepted and you have to be changing for it.
So all the intermediate steps are now eliminated.
Eliminated to the point now that you'll be buying a camera like this without any film.
You'll take a picture and the picture will be on a computer chip.
And you can buy these now, isn't that right?
And then you'll take that chip home to your computer, and you'll load it onto the computer, and this is how they will send the pictures to the newspapers, by digitized information.
And that's what Mr. Gates is going to do with all of your photographs.
He's going to digitize them all.
It's amazing, isn't it?
It is a new world.
No, I have a question for you.
It doesn't make much for literacy.
I don't know.
And this is a very sad thing with the absolute decline of your own.
That is a participatory process.
You know, when you read and try to conjure up what happened in 1830, Napoleon and Helena.
Yes, you see it, and it's wonderful.
Do we know that Napoleon was an enormous reader, that he had a special man in a big library, and every hour he asked for a new book?
I think all that lama and the really fine point and the oddities are eliminated.
So I'm really a traitor on my trade for Napoleon.
I do am fully conscious that what you see is very one mind, one directed.
Do you know this new magazine that the Library of Congress publishes, Civilization?
I've heard of it.
It's supposed to be one of them.
Yeah, it's very lovely.
We're going to have to subscribe.
Anyway, they have a department, the last page,
called Caption in which I don't think I have caption in which all the people say how wonderful one can describe the great events of history and I have written a little piece there in which I show a picture of Albert Schweitzer
near his organ in Lamborghini just a bushy old man you know and I said how little this really tells us about this enormous enormous phenomenon theologian doctor missionary Bach player etc pictures do not make us
make us civilized.
They're a nice, a nice pageant of things, but they don't really lead us like, like, like words into the inner man.
So, again, I, I,
the clear war against the medium that has kept me alive.
I heard you interviewed on National Public Radio right after the archive.
Yeah, I didn't hear it, yeah.
In fact, I taped it.
I have it at home.
Oh, really, yeah.
It's an imperfect copy, but I'd be happy to make a copy of it and send it to you if you haven't heard it.
I'd be more than happy to do that.
But it's rather negative.
I don't think that does contribute very much to you or what you want to do.
I wish you would ask me, Robert.
I'm talking by myself.
You're really covering the areas that I want to cover.
Were you ever interested in being
a photographer yourself on the, on the, on the level, say, of a Steichen or an... No, no, I was rather cool.
I, I must admit, I, I never wanted to, to, to, um, to put my energies into this.
I'm not very, not very good at it.
My first Leica, yes, I admired what I could do, but I, uh,
rather like to put my energy into the finding of unusual pictures and then try to not only have the pictures but interpret them and put them in the context of our whole pattern of civilization, so to speak.
I always was more of a historian, a picture historian, and one who once
to perpetuate very odd situations, oddities, and such things.
So I think we're going a little bit too far, but I think it's a bit worse.
I think we cannot escape this trend, and people who are not quite of this age never quite see what...
what these new novelties and these new inventions really can bring.
So I'm not desperate that we go down, but I think there's a general flattening, you know, all this putting Dickens' novel into cartoon form that you can guarantee
in 10 minutes you can run your way to and you know it thickens but then really all the finer points are left out the eye can by itself cannot think it cherishes the sensation but you really have to sit down and study things and put your own input into it
You also acquired entire collections, as I understand it, too, of photographs.
You weren't just looking for single photographic images.
You also were interested in getting entire collections that other people wanted to put together.
Well, you would show the development of things, you know, how things developed.
I have to hear a whole
I don't know whether you have seen this.
I want to write that down so I can look this up at Harvard.
Yeah.
If I could give you a cover.
No, no, it's fine.
I will find it.
I'm a pretty resourceful collector, and I assure you I can find this.
Also, you should ... I've made a whole ... This is still available.
I can find that, sir.
I'll just write it down a little bit.
I published this myself, my own imprint, so to speak.
And I love that you used the Archim Waldo in your pictures.
Oh, this is Pinky White Press.
Okay, that's good.
And this is 1966.
I picked your house.
You know, we haven't even discussed at all as the importance.
I was mentioning the NPR interview, but I think you played a Bach piece, actually.
Do you play Bach every day, I notice?
Well, yes, I've become a little lazy, but it is an epitome of order, and order, you put order in your life.
one of the most important things, and the pictures don't tell you of the struggle of people and of city life and country life, and you have to read.
So I am pleading against the picture itself.
But one thing the computer can't do is replicate the music.
We haven't even discussed the music.
They try to compose with a computer.
Maybe we are blindfolded.
Maybe there are possibilities that we do not see.
After all, I think you mentioned that, that the ancient
conservatives and the rich people in the middle ages who collected books only books written by monks with beautiful miniature illustrations deigned it improper to put all their money into
into printed books.
It was a form of communication that is sort of inferior to the handwritten book.
This is 1978, from Random House did this.
Yeah.
I can get a copy of that.
That's good.
Connie, do you have any questions that you want to ask Dr. Bethlehem?
You mentioned that your wife was in antiques, is that right?
Yeah, we went to expeditions to your wonderful New England headquarters of antique furniture, and she bought furniture, and I tried to get old books with illustrations, and
So we had much in common.
We were very much sold on the New England charm.
I think you have it there a little more than in a big city.
Life has a third dimension there, which is so wonderful.
In the city you live and rush around like a madman.
It's a little duty to life.
So I'm, by choice, a New Englander with a heavy German accent.
How old are you now, Dr. Raffet?
Hmm?
How old are you now?
How old are you?
What is your age?
Well, you know that I'm ready to say goodbye.
I'm terrible.
Ninety-two.
So you've actually—
seen virtually the entire twentieth century as we approach the next millennium.
Do you have any wisdom on what you've seen?
I'm not overly curious, but I think it would be in general the typical attitude maybe of the old man who obviously, when I was young, things were better.
from the man who has some, how should I call it, cultural sensitivity, I cannot quite foresee that.
I think things will become more and more mechanized, and the spiritual will be pushed in the background, and more material things will
to take the upper hand.
I do not despise or disparage incredible progress that we have made in the unbelievable blessings that medical technology has brought us.
But one of the more popular books of mine has been this books he's written, which still stands to my amazement.
Wonderful.
I'm rather reading my words, eating my own words, for this
Did the good old days they were terrible?
The good old days they were terrible.
We have mechanically in our way of living made great progress, but we have not created a Michelangelo or Goethe or Emerson.
The thinking is not highly priced these days.
Thinking is not highly prized.
No, I think people want to have more money.
But they lead a sad life at times.
There's a slight counter movement.
I see it here in Florida.
I never wanted to come to Florida.
It's for the very old, but I'm part of it now.
But there's a great...
reaction, and the counter-movement.
I mean, very fine concerts here, and the literary movements.
But the main emphasis is on the materialistic, and people are quite unhappy.
How long have you been in Florida now?
Since, well,
about 20 years, and I came in the early 70s, 73 I was.
I didn't want to come, really.
I sneered at this old man's country where only people and crutches are admitted.
But I find it rather lively.
the liveliness does not come only from bigger buildings but maybe a slight more emphasis on the intellectual and fine ballets and theater and music is described quite remarkably represented now there's always a group which
does not simply want to live on the material things.
Mr. Gates, in a way I understand, is a very art-conscious fellow, isn't he?
Art-conscious, yes.
He bought the Leonardo da Vinci Codex for $30 million.
That belongs to another capitalist.
It's interesting.
I hope to talk to him for this next book as well.
It should be very interesting to
to see where he's going and, uh, what his thoughts are.
He's quite a phenomenon, really.
People are afraid that through his, uh, through his, uh, uh, buying up the, the copyrights to the National Gallery and the Louvre and so on, and he becomes a star of this whole field, and, uh,
It will be very hard to get hold of these pressures.
Are you anxious about this yourself?
Is this something that concerns you as well?
Well, yes.
I think that the free access is a little bit impaired or threatened to be impaired.
So...
I don't just quite know how he is going to handle it.
But I'm talking a blue streak, Mr. Baines, and you must ask me questions.
I am asking you, actually.
You're covering the areas that I wanted to cover.
I wonder, when you talk about the power of the book, do you like to read new books or explore older ones that you loved?
Tell me a little bit about your readings.
I'm a victim of my own criticism for, I must admit, it is even in my very old age so very, very rare that I can read the whole, just read a book about this famous book on Mozart by Maynard.
You see it in the shrinkage of books.
These, these,
I'm quite amazed and admired the persistence that you put out a book.
She pushed me on.
She said, who wants a small book?
My wife loves big books, so I had to satisfy my wife.
Are you okay to hear of big books, Dostoyevsky?
Tolstoy.
Tolstoy, Balzac.
She's reading Google now.
But there's a time.
It's shameful.
A man of my age really seemingly disengaged in many worldly things.
My greatest pleasure, I must admit, was still writing letters.
And I'm lucky enough to have a young lady so terribly far away whom I write letters to.
But it used to do, I just got this new book on Mozart by Neymar Solomon.
I think I know.
We know the book.
I know the book, Doctor.
I know the book.
It is interesting, but if you find this half hour before fall asleep, it's...
Even for me, who is so totally disengaged in the usual activities of life, it is kind of tough.
It's heavy.
Yes.
And there is, when you look at new books, they have all shrunk in size, big...
terribly picked books, but please, I admire your book.
It is incredibly rich in material, but people are not inclined to... Yes, my one point is about others who might have come with you from Leipzig or Germany, bookmen and scholars,
And what happened to them?
Were they able to shift over?
Yes, as you did.
They write magazine articles.
There's an enormous increase in magazine numbers, this and there.
And the whole tendency turned towards
speed, a quick take-in of long books.
I have always, it may be a paradox, I thought, but when I retire, I don't have to be in the office at 8 o'clock, then I catch up again with all these books, War on Peace, and I find myself super deprived of time, and I do not listen to television more than
Maybe ten minutes a day.
You're still working.
You mentioned that you came to Florida reluctantly, but that you've come to like it.
Do you miss Manhattan, on the other hand?
Did you really enjoy New York City a lot?
Well, yes.
When I was younger, I didn't want to hear of Florida.
It was a very lively, wonderful existence.
My wife was very active in the antique business field.
We lived in a certain place.
The office was quite impressive.
But I thought I would never leave New York in its temple.
But I found great attraction here, too.
I got connected with the library, the Florida Atlantic Library, a very fine place where
highly computerized.
As a matter of fact, in two weeks we have a big shindig.
I hate it, but I have to submit myself to it.
I have built up there to a little picture department.
You have.
You have, is that right?
Yeah.
trying to sneak out of a little evening of... We haven't even talked about Bach at all.
We should a little bit.
We talk about a passion.
I don't know if the photos were ever a passion for you.
No, I wouldn't say no.
I wouldn't say a passion.
They come to me as a
message from the past in a way and there are no pictures that I really definitely love and find fulfilling it doesn't give me quite enough it's all surface stuff the pictorial gives you the surface of things
And you need the deepening, at least intellectually interested people need the deepening of the world.
Let's see where I have this article there.
Through the seeing of
Norman Cousins.
Is he still alive?
Oh, yes, I think.
I'm not so sure if he's still alive or not.
Cousins, Norman Cousins.
Yeah, he was, uh, editor of The Seventy, uh, Saturday Evening Post, I think, right?
I'm sorry.
Yeah.
Anyway, he, uh, he makes a very fine statement that, too, he's on my side and, uh, regrets, uh, uh,
that a verb can do considerably more than a big snap photo impression, which catches only the outside of things.
Are you deeply involved in your husband's activities?
Do you have a feeling you are...
Good second Hitler.
I'm second Hitler.
He does all the work.
I'm just there.
She's being very modest, really.
This book was her idea, I have to say.
Really?
It is a book after my taste, but I wish you couldn't only buy the book.
But also good by the time to read it thoroughly.
I'm just going to trim this.
I get angry at myself for not reading more.